# Printing variables

Put a variable or expression between `{{ }}` to output the result.

For example, to print the variable `name`:

```vento
{{ name }}
```

Everything you put between `{{ }}` is evaluated as JavaScript code so you can
print the result of an expression:

```vento
{{ (name + " " + surname).toUpperCase() }}
```

Or a condition:

```vento
{{ name || "Unknown" }}
```

Or an async operation (using `await`):

```vento
{{ await users.getUserName(23) }}
```

## Autoescaping

> [!important]
> Autoescaping is **disabled by default**.
> [See configuration](../configuration.md#autoescape) to learn how to enable it.

If autoescaping is enabled any HTML content will be escaped automatically. For
example:

```vento
{{ "<h1>Hello, world!</h1>" }}
```

This prints:

```html
&lt;h1&gt;Hello, world!&lt;/h1&gt;
```

To mark this variable as trust, use the `safe` filter:

```vento
{{ "<h1>Hello, world!</h1>" |> safe }}
```

## Trimming the previous/next content

Use the `-` character next to the opening tag or previous to the closing tag to
remove all white spaces and line breaks of the previous or next content.

In the following example, the `-` in the opening tag configure Vento to remove
the white space before the printing tag:

```vento
<h1>
  {{- "Hello, world!" }}
</h1>
```

The result is:

```html
<h1>Hello, world!
</h1>
```

Use the `-` character in both opening and closing tags to remove the white space
previous and next to the printing tag:

```html
<h1>
  {{- "Hello, world!" -}}
</h1>
```

The result is:

```html
<h1>Hello, world!</h1>
```

> [!tip]
> The [plugin autoTrim](../plugins/auto-trim.md) can trim automatically
> some tags.

## Pipes

Pipes allow transforming the content before printing it using custom functions
or global functions. [More info about pipes](./pipes.md).

Vento comes with the `escape` filter by default. This filter escapes the html
code. For example:

```vento
{{ "<h1>Hello, world!</h1>" |> escape }}
```

This code outputs:

```html
&lt;h1&gt;Hello, world!&lt;/h1&gt;
```

## Echo

The `{{ echo }}` tag does the same as printing. It was added to cover a couple
of common cases:

### Disable the tag processing temporarily

You might want to print content with conflicting syntax (like code examples of
Vento, Nunjucks, Liquid, Mustache etc):

```vento
{{ echo }}
In Vento, {{ name }} will print the "name" variable.
Use {{ name |> escape }} to HTML-escape its content
{{ /echo }}
```

### To apply pipes to a block of content

Let's say you have a `md` filter to transform Markdown content to HTML:

```vento
{{ echo |> md }}
## Header

- First item.
- Second item.
{{ /echo }}
```

The `echo` tag can also be used in inline mode, passing the content after the
tag name:

```vento
{{ echo "Hello, world!" }}
```

Which is exactly the same as:

```vento
{{ "Hello, world!" }}
```
